# Broths, Soups, & Noodles

## From Jennifer McGruthe’s Broth & Stock from the Nourished Kitchen

## A few notes on stocks, broths, and bone broths from Jennifer McGruthe:
The word restaurant comes from the French word restorer, meaning, as you might guess, “to restore.” A man by the name of Boulanger opened the first restaurant in Paris in the eighteenth century, serving only broths and soups. His sign, the legend goes, read VENITE AD ME VOS QU STOMACHO LABORATIS ET EGO RESTAURABO VOS, or, “Come to me, all who labor in the stomach, and I will restore you.” From that sign, his shop became known as a restaurant. And soon any place dedicated to preparing meals on site and serving them to paying diners became known as a restaurant, too. It all started with good broth.

Broth and stock form the foundation of my cooking, and I try to keep them on hand in the kitchen so I can use them at a moment’s notice. I begin by simmering bones or meat, water, and wine together, sometimes adding herbs, aromatic vegetables, and spices to the pot. Simmered for several hours on my stove top over low heat so that it barely bubbles, it forms a beautiful liquid. I then strain out the richly colored liquid that can range from pale yellow to a deep coffee brown. This protein-dense broth or stock with a trace of minerals finds its way into many of the dishes I make at home, including soups and stews, sauces and gravies, risottos and pilaf, giving each a boost of nourishment and infusing them with a savory yet neutral flavor

## Gelatin in broth
If you’ve ever roasted a chicken or turkey and left it on the counter or in the fridge overnight only to find that its juices congealed, you’ve made gelatin. Bones, skin, joints, and connective tissue are naturally rich in collagen. When you drop collagen-rich cuts of meat and bone into your pot, cover them with liquid like water, and turn up the heat, that collagen transforms into gelatin. Gelatin is what gives broth its silky-smooth texture when hot and its characteristic bouncy gelled texture when it cools. Gelatin is rich in protein, and while it is not a complete protein in and of itself, it acts as a protein sparer, helping the protein you do eat go a little further. The proteins that form gelatin, glycine and proline, have anti-inflammatory properties, and some evidence indicates they may help reduce signs of aging.

## Broth
At its simplest, broth is the liquid that is left after you’ve simmered or cooked meat. Composed primarily of meat, water, and perhaps some vegetables or herbs thrown in the pot for good measure, broths are quick-cooking by comparison to stocks and bone broths. Thinner in body and lighter in flavor than stocks and bone broths, broths based on meat come together in just a few hours. Their flavor is meat-forward, and they do well as a basis for simple soups or sipped on their own.

## Stock
Where meat provides the base for broths, bones provide the base for stocks and, in this way, they’re nearly indistinguishable from bone broths in a practical, culinary sense. Bones, cartilage, and whatever connective tissue happens to adhere to them are dropped into a pot of water to form the foundation of stock. When simmered for several hours, this combination of bone, cartilage, and connective tissue gives stock the luxurious, silky-smooth texture that meat-based broths lack. Vegetables, herbs, and spices can enliven stocks, much as they do broths, infusing them with the flavors of whatever dish you plan to prepare. While broths are often sipped on their own or speckled with meat, herbs, vegetables, and grains to serve as the base for loose, liquid soups, stocks, by contrast, serve as the foundation for many dishes: a liquid in which to braise meats or vegetables or the foundation for sauces, gravies, hearty soups, and stews.

While meat-based broths typically cook for an hour or two, stocks cook much longer. A good rule of thumb to consider is that chicken and poultry stocks simmer for three to four hours, while stocks made from beef, pork, or lamb bones simmer for six to ten hours, or until the stock is rich in flavor with a silky body.

Cooks further divide stocks by classifying them as either white stocks (made from uncooked bones) or brown stocks (prepared with roasted bones). Roasting bones enriches stocks and bone broths with light caramel and deeply savory notes, while white stocks tend to taste lighter and less complex. 

## Bone broth
Just as with stocks, bones form the foundation of bone broths. So if they’re made with the same fundamental ingredients as stock, you might wonder exactly what the difference is. While stocks simmer for several hours until richly flavored, bone broths cook for considerably longer, often for a half a day or up to two full days. At completion, the bones will have simmered so long that they typically crumble when pinched between the thumb and forefinger. This extended cooking time produces extremely flavorful results and extracts as much gelatin as possible as well as some minerals from the bones and connective tissue.

## Choosing bones
When making stocks and bone broths, you’re after a deep and rich flavor as well as a luxurious, silky texture. The silkiness in a good bone broth comes from the gelatin that forms when the collagen in the cartilage and connective tissue that adheres to bones dissolves into your cooking liquid. When you choose bones for your broth, keep in mind that those that have the most connective tissue and cartilage make the best broth, one that will be smooth in texture and rich in protein.

As animals age, they lose cartilage, so the stocks made from the bones of younger animals typically set to a stronger gel with less time on the stove than the stock made from bones of older animals. Flavor, in both meat and bones, increases as animals age and with the amount of exercise an animal is permitted to undertake, so the bones from older animals typically produce a more strongly flavored broth than that made from younger animals. 

While bones with plenty of connective tissue, like knuckles and trotters, give body to bone broths and stocks, neck bones and 
marrow bones contribute flavor and richness. Partnering them together in the stockpot produces bone broths and stocks with a beautiful gel and silky texture, and a good flavor, too. Always strive for balance when making stocks and bone broths, taking care to add a good mix of marrow-rich, jointed, and meaty bones to your pot.

## Chicken, turkey, and poultry bones
Bones from chickens, turkeys, and other birds make beautiful broths. If you roast a chicken for Sunday dinner or a turkey for Thanksgiving, save the bird’s carcass for the stockpot. This frame already includes meaty bones, marrow-rich bones like the leg bones, and cartilage-rich bones like the breastbone. A few chicken or turkey feet, scrubbed clean, trimmed, and thrown into the pot with the rest of the bird’s bones, will produce a particularly gelatinous broth. If you can stomach them, chicken heads, plucked and cleaned, also produce a gelatinous broth, as the bird’s comb is an excellent source of collagen. Of course, unless you happen to process the birds yourself, you’re unlikely to find these parts available for purchase anywhere.

## Why stewing hens make the best broth
While any whole chicken will do in making broth, a stewing hen will give you superb results. As animals age, two things happen to their meat: It grows richer in flavor and it toughens. The chickens sold as fryers, broilers, or roasting birds at farmer’s markets and in grocery stores are young birds, culled at an early age of about six to eight weeks. These young birds give tender meat.
Laying or stewing hens, by contrast, are culled at an older age. Unlike frying and roasting birds, these chickens are bred lean and hearty and for egg production. As these birds age, they lay eggs with less frequency until they stop laying eggs altogether at around eight years old.
While these hens are not suitable for roasting and frying, they are perfect for the soup pot. Their meat is tougher and more flavorful than that of chickens bred for meat production, and they also accumulate a fair amount of rich yellow fat. As you simmer the hen, that fat renders, and will rise to the surface of any broth. Spoon this fat off and use it as a cooking fat; it has a delicious flavor and lovely texture owing to its high content of monounsaturated fat.

Stewing hens are not only perfect for making stocks and long-simmered bone broths like Whole Chicken Broth, but are also excellent in dishes that make their own broth like Cream of Chicken Soup with Parsley and Chives and Yucatán-Style Lime Soup. You can usually find stewing hens at farmers markets and farm stands, or ask your egg provider to save you a hen the next time she culls her flock. It’s well worth it.

## Beef, veal, lamb, and pork bones
Bones from larger animals, like domestic ruminants and pigs, produce a robust stock or bone broth that stands up well to strong, earthy, and hearty flavors like beets and other root vegetables, as well as tomatoes, beans, and split peas. When making beef, lamb, or pork stock or bone broth, look for a wide variety of bones. Meaty neck bones will give a rich flavor to your bone broths and stocks. Knucklebones and oxtails are a good source of connective tissue, and they will produce a protein-rich gelatin, while marrow bones will flavor your stocks and bone broths and render their fat, which you can scoop off and use to fry potatoes or sauté vegetables.

When I buy pork bones for making bone broth, I aim for a variety of bones, just as I do with beef. I usually select a variety of neck and rib bones as well as pork hocks. Pig ears and trotters are a good source of connective tissue and the much-needed cartilage that gives bone broth its body. Ham hocks, cured and smoked like bacon, also make a beautiful broth when combined with other foods, particularly earthy beans, but are too richly flavored to be used in the stockpot without something like lentils or beans to give them balance.

## Wine and vinegar
The addition of something acidic, like wine or vinegar, not only helps build flavor in stocks and bone broths, but also facilitates the release of minerals from the bone. While bones are rich in minerals, bone broths are not necessarily a particularly good source of them, though they do contain a fair amount of calcium, magnesium, and potassium, especially given their high water content. Adding vinegar or wine to the cooking water helps the bones release those minerals. I favor wine over vinegar, owing mostly to its flavor, and so when I make bone broth, I add a glassful of wine to the pot and pour one to enjoy myself. I typically use dry white wine when preparing chicken stocks and broths, and red wine like Merlot or Cabernet Sauvignon when preparing beef stocks and bone broths.

## Vegetables you want (and those you don’t)
Vegetables add flavor and depth to broths and stocks. Those flavors serve as the base notes on which you layer the middle and top notes of your dish, so be careful not to introduce flavors to your broth or stock that do not pair well with the flavors in your final dish. For this reason, and with the exception of vegetable broths, the stocks and broths included in this book are wonderfully bare, nothing more than bones, water, and wine. This allows you to season and flavor your broths and stocks as you see fit and ensure they will complement your final dish rather than detract from it.

Often the trimmings of whatever vegetables you happen to work with for dinner, or for a soup, work well to flavor your broth. If you’re cooking with carrots, add the carrot tops and the peelings to flavor your broth, wasting as little of the vegetable in the process. The tough, fibrous stem of broccoli will flavor the base of a broccoli soup nicely, while a knob of ginger and the external layers of an onion can do wonders to flavor the broth of a curried butternut squash soup. 

Keep in mind that there are a few vegetables best avoided: Brassicas (aside from broccoli for a broccoli soup) like Brussels sprouts and cabbage can introduce bitter notes to stocks and broths, particularly during prolonged cooking. Beets and other root vegetables can be too earthy, and their carbohydrates break down during the long simmering time required of broths, resulting in broth that is too sweet.

In addition to helping broths and stocks develop flavor, vegetables also improve their mineral content. Vegetables easily part with their minerals and flavor when simmered in stocks and broths, so be sure to add them later in cooking than bones, which require more time to release their goodness. If added too early, vegetables can add undesirable strong, sweet notes to your stock or broth.

## Herbs and spices
Herbs and spices, like vegetables, help round out a broth’s or stock’s flavor. I often add whole peppercorns, bay leaves, thyme, and parsley to many of my broths and stocks. Or I might try a combination of ginger, lemongrass, and chile peppers for an Asian-inspired stock. A little goes a long way with herbs and spices, and too much can quickly overpower the flavor of a broth, especially with prolonged cooking. For home cooks who might use their broths and stocks in a variety of dishes with a sweeping array of flavor profiles, keeping the stock itself to little more than bones and water, and then seasoning only when you prepare your meal, is essential to ensure a great dish.

## How to store broth & stock
While we seem to use up any broth and stock I make within a day or two, it’s nice to have them on hand, readily stored, to use in a pinch. Reduction is my favorite storage method, as it concentrates flavor and shrinks the space required in the refrigerator. When I’m ready to use it, all I need to do is spoon a bit of the gelled broth or stock into a pot, add water, and heat it up. For those of you with little freezer space, lots of liquid, and a little time for experimentation, you might consider reducing them first and then drying them in a dehydrator until they forms a firm, glassy sheet that you can then shatter or grind to a powder and rehydrate with a little water.

You can also freeze broth and stock easily. If you freeze them in ice cube trays, you can pull out just a few tablespoons at a time, rather than quarts. Of course, one of the best ways to store homemade broth and stock is to pressure-can it, which allows you to store it for several years at room temperature. 

## Reduction
To reduce a broth or stock, pour it into a wide and fairly shallow pan, like a sauté pan or a reduction pan. Bring to a simmer over medium-low heat so that it barely bubbles and then allow it to reduce until it is concentrated and viscous, like maple syrup. 

The time it takes to reduce depends on three factors: the quantity of liquid you begin with, the type of pot you use, and how concentrated you like your final product to be. Reducing broth or stock in a wide and shallow pan takes less time, as the greater surface area hastens evaporation. You can concentrate it until reduced by half, becoming thin but syrupy, or you can reduce it further still until it reaches a viscous and ropy consistency like that needed for portable soup, an old-fashioned preserved broth. Pour your broth or stock into an airtight container and store it in the fridge for up to three weeks or in the freezer for up to six months.

## Dehydration
You can make your own instant stock powder, which is easily dissolved in hot water. First begin by reducing stock to one-tenth of its original volume in a wide, shallow pan set over medium-low heat. Allow it to cool to room temperature. While it cools, line the trays of a dehydrator with wax paper or ParaFlexx sheets. Spoon the cooled liquid onto the sheets, taking care to spoon no more than a cup onto each sheet. Dehydrate at 165°F for eighteen to twenty-four hours, or until it forms a brittle sheet. Break up the sheets of and then pulse in a food processor or spice grinder until they form a fine powder. Transfer to an airtight container and store at room temperature for up to one year.

## Freezing
For convenience, especially when you require only a small amount of broth at any given time, consider freezing the broth in small cubes. Pour room-temperature broth into ice cube trays, freeze them, break them out of the tray, and store in a resealable plastic freezer bag in the freezer for up to six months. Each cube will contain about two tablespoons of broth, for easy measurement into recipes. If you prefer to freeze larger quantities of broth and wish to avoid freezing your broth in plastic containers, remember that glass may crack or shatter while in the freezer. If you freeze in glass, be sure to keep the jars no more than three-quarters full.

## Pressure canning
If you plan to make large quantities of broth, you can pressure-can it. Pour the broth into quart-size glass canning jars and process in a weighted-gauge pressure canner at 10 PSI for twenty-five minutes for those of you living at an elevation of 1,000 feet or below, and process the jars at 15 PSI for twenty-five minutes for those of you living at an altitude above 1,000 feet. 

Always check with your local cooperative extension office for specific guidelines per your region. Pressure-canned broths and stocks will store for several years but should be used within one week once you open them. Broths and stocks are low-acid foods, and unlike pickles, jellies, and fruits, you cannot safely can them using the water bath method of submerging jars into boiling water until they seal; rather, broth and stock must be pressure-canned to eliminate the risk of foodborne illness like botulism. Pressure-canning broths and stocks can be particularly helpful for homesteaders or hunters who must process many pounds of bones all at once, but for most of us the process is laborious without offering many benefits. 

At home, I favor keeping things simple. For me, it means relying on a few handy master recipes and reducing the broth or stock I make down to a fine gel, pouring it into an airtight container, and storing it in the fridge to use as needed.
